README.markdown, before:

The idea of this tool is to get a report about program compilation so
you will know where GHC spends time, and what does it do. This way to
can verify your ideas about how to make compilation faster without
touching GHC, and leads to better understanding why it where does it
spend time and if it reasonable or not. If improved this tool can be
used a a guidance to the improving codebase and possibly GHC to get
better timings without sacrificing functionality. At least I hope so.

For the author this tool even in it's simplest form allowed to find
a way to speedup compilation on 20% by just reorganizing code structure
in the project.

NOTE: this tool is in the very early stage, and I work on that in my
free time, basically during official holydays only. As a result I target
only my usecase, so not all configurations are supported, but I gladly
apply any merge requests that will make live of other users easier.

## How to use.

1. Download the tool:

```haskell
hub clone https://github.com/qnikst/ghc-timings-report
```

2. Build it:

```bash
cabal v2-build
```

At this point I don't suggest you to install the tool because
at such an early stage it will likely require manual configuration 
a lot.

3. Configure your project in order to generate timing files:
 
```bash
cabal v2-configure --ghc-options=-ddump-timings --ghc-options=-ddump-to-file
```

`-ddump-timings` tells GHC to generate timings report, `-ddump-to-file` tells GHC
to store those reports to files.

4. Running:

```bash
cabal v2-run ghc-timings /Users/qnikst/workspace/another-project/dist-newstyle
```

In the `tmp` folder you'll get all the reports.

# Report files.

(Note this section will likely always be outdated despite all efforts to keep it up to date,
sorry for that)

Root of the report files is file:

`index.html` that contains links to html file files with summary report for each individual
package. There are other files as well:

Report that are generated keeps a ton of -garbage- useful data for each module in all the
projects you'll see files:

```
<host-os>--<ghc-version>--<package-version>--<module>.dump-timings.json
<host-os>--<ghc-version>--<package-version>--<module>.dump-timings.csv
```

That contains a table for each module with th name of the phase, module, number of allocations, and time
spend on that phase.

And report files:

```
<package-version>.csv
```

That summarizes information for the package. File keeps list of modules, and total compilation time
for module and total time for each phase. If you import `<package-version>.csv` file to some
package that works with tables like numbers, you'll see something like this:

![screen1](https://github.com/qnikst/ghc-timings-report/blob/master/screenshot1.png?raw=true)


# Project ideology.

Here I want to share a bits of how I work on this project and it's not usual one for me.
I don't know where this project would lead, it has proved to be useful at least
for me from the very early development steps. But I don't know how to get good analysis
and I don't know that if data will be useful or not. So I use following guidance:

a. Write in a cheap and dirty way so you get your results as fast as possible, it allows
me to actually see and verify if I can make any use of the data. It does not worth to
spend much time on the design if you'll throw it away because it's not useful at all.
But once code is proven to work and useful it worth stabilizing it by proper refactoring.
Also this means that I sometime do not use most efficient and nice tricks like foldl
package, unless I have a good understanding of it's use, so I don't spend much time
learnings that. But I'd like to be pushed into the directions that can improve the
package pipeline in a cheap way.

b. Despite of writing dirty way it worth to keep types that describe the problem on
each step, to make refactoring simpler.

c. There are many tools that can be used for data visualization and analyses so it worth
to store all intermediate data in a machine readable format. This way it's possble to
not be tighed to Haskell. (Though I hope)


# Notes.

1. It's a pity that we don't have memory residency statistics per module, because allocations
tells nothing and it's basically just another "time" report. So for now I avoid working with
that in statistics reports.
2. I've tried to build a table where I output all the phases, but such a table bacame too
big so "Numbers" that I was using for working with data refused to work with it. So I've
abadonned that idea unless I'll find a way to represent data in a compact way.
3. `-ddump-json` doesn't affect `-ddump-timings` to it still required to use custom format
parser instead of nice json one.

Commit message:

Update README with `compare` section

README.markdown, after:

The idea of this tool is to get a report about program compilation so
you will know where GHC spends time, and what does it do. This way to
can verify your ideas about how to make compilation faster without
touching GHC, and leads to better understanding why it where does it
spend time and if it reasonable or not. If improved this tool can be
used a a guidance to the improving codebase and possibly GHC to get
better timings without sacrificing functionality. At least I hope so.

For the author this tool even in it's simplest form allowed to find
a way to speedup compilation on 20% by just reorganizing code structure
in the project.

NOTE: this tool is in the very early stage, and I work on that in my
free time, basically during official holydays only. As a result I target
only my usecase, so not all configurations are supported, but I gladly
apply any merge requests that will make live of other users easier.

## How to use.

1. Download the tool:

```haskell
hub clone https://github.com/qnikst/ghc-timings-report
```

2. Build it:

```bash
cabal v2-build
```

At this point I don't suggest you to install the tool because
at such an early stage it will likely require manual configuration 
a lot.

3. Configure your project in order to generate timing files:
 
```bash
cabal v2-configure --ghc-options=-ddump-timings --ghc-options=-ddump-to-file
```

`-ddump-timings` tells GHC to generate timings report, `-ddump-to-file` tells GHC
to store those reports to files.

4. Running:

```bash
cabal v2-run ghc-timings generate -i /Users/qnikst/workspace/another-project/dist-newstyle
```

In the `tmp` folder you'll get all the reports.

# Report files.

(Note this section will likely always be outdated despite all efforts to keep it up to date,
sorry for that)

Root of the report files is file:

`index.html` that contains links to html file files with summary report for each individual
package. There are other files as well:

Report that are generated keeps a ton of -garbage- useful data for each module in all the
projects you'll see files:

```
<host-os>--<ghc-version>--<package-version>--<module>.dump-timings.json
<host-os>--<ghc-version>--<package-version>--<module>.dump-timings.csv
```

That contains a table for each module with th name of the phase, module, number of allocations, and time
spend on that phase.

And report files:

```
<package-version>.csv
```

That summarizes information for the package. File keeps list of modules, and total compilation time
for module and total time for each phase. If you import `<package-version>.csv` file to some
package that works with tables like numbers, you'll see something like this:

![screen1](https://github.com/qnikst/ghc-timings-report/blob/master/screenshot1.png?raw=true)


# Compare

**Prerequisites**: you need to have `gnuplot` executable on your `$PATH` to use it.

With following `compare` command you may actually compare results of two different builds.

```bash
cabal v2-run ghc-timings compare -b ./before -a ./after -o output_dir
```

It will produce a bunch of plots with package/project module names and `.svg` extension and one more `package.svg` with a summary.

On the plot you can observe comparison between build times from two build runs per each phase (in `<module>.svg`) or per each module (in `package.svg`).


# Project ideology.

Here I want to share a bits of how I work on this project and it's not usual one for me.
I don't know where this project would lead, it has proved to be useful at least
for me from the very early development steps. But I don't know how to get good analysis
and I don't know that if data will be useful or not. So I use following guidance:

a. Write in a cheap and dirty way so you get your results as fast as possible, it allows
me to actually see and verify if I can make any use of the data. It does not worth to
spend much time on the design if you'll throw it away because it's not useful at all.
But once code is proven to work and useful it worth stabilizing it by proper refactoring.
Also this means that I sometime do not use most efficient and nice tricks like foldl
package, unless I have a good understanding of it's use, so I don't spend much time
learnings that. But I'd like to be pushed into the directions that can improve the
package pipeline in a cheap way.

b. Despite of writing dirty way it worth to keep types that describe the problem on
each step, to make refactoring simpler.

c. There are many tools that can be used for data visualization and analyses so it worth
to store all intermediate data in a machine readable format. This way it's possble to
not be tighed to Haskell. (Though I hope)


# Notes.

1. It's a pity that we don't have memory residency statistics per module, because allocations
tells nothing and it's basically just another "time" report. So for now I avoid working with
that in statistics reports.
2. I've tried to build a table where I output all the phases, but such a table bacame too
big so "Numbers" that I was using for working with data refused to work with it. So I've
abadonned that idea unless I'll find a way to represent data in a compact way.
3. `-ddump-json` doesn't affect `-ddump-timings` to it still required to use custom format
parser instead of nice json one.
